			    Unix Panic List
			    ---------------
"addrtocst"
Addrtocst was given a physical page address which doesn't exist.  Software.

"badallocpage"
Allocpage was given invalid arguments.

"badclearpte"
Clearptetable (which clears all of an address space) was given bad arguments.

"badcopypte"
Copyptetable (used for fork) tried to copy an address space to itself.

"badcopyu"
Copyu was given a bad argument.  Software error.

"badcstshare"
Clearmap freed a memory page which was not in use.

"baddownshare"
Downshare was called with invalid arguments.

"badmemswapout"
Swapout tried to swap out a page not in memory.  Impossible; software error.

"badnullpte"
Pagein was called for a process which was not the current one.

"badownunlock"
A page table's lock count was inconsistent.

"badpageforswap"
Swapoutpages could not find the owning page table for a page to swap.

"badpagein"
Pagein found an invalid type of pte.

"badpagein2"
Pagein2 (which locates a page table) was given invalid arguments.

"badpagein2pte"
Pagein2 found an invalid type of pte.

"badpagesswapout"
Swapout tried to swap out a page not in memory.  Impossible; software error.

"badphysadr"
Physaddr was given invalid arguments.

"badpteshare"
Clearptetable freed a page table page, which was not in use.

"badscanmap"
Scanmap was called with bad arguments.  Software error.

"badscanpagein"
Scanmap could not find the page table for a page of address space.

"badsptshare"
Downshare tried to decrement a share counter for a page below zero.

"badsupabort"
A supervisor mode abort occurred at an instruction whose opcode or
arguments is not one which can be handled.

"badsupabortpc"
A supervisor mode abort occurred at an illegal pc.

"badswappage"
Swapfree tried to free an invalid page of the swapping space.

"badswtchu"
Swtchu was given a new process number which is out of range.

"badsysnullpte"
Pagein was called for a kernel address which was not for the U. areas.

"badunlock"
Unlockpage tried to lock a nonexistent memory page, or one which was not locked.

"badunlockmempage"
Unlockmem found that a page to unlock was not a memory page.

"badupshare"
Upshare was called with invalid arguments.

"badxattach"
Xattach (for reading in text segments for exec) was given invalid arguments.

"blkdev"
Impossible block device type (in internal getblk routine of buffered
i/o system). Definite software error.

"clearbadpte"
Clearmap found an invalid type of pte.

"copybadpte"
Copyptetable found an invalid type of pte.

"dcubadblkcnt"
Disk asked to transfer negative (or zero) number of blocks. Software error.

"dcubadcmd1"
Disk thinks it got a bad command (immediate status bits).
Hardware/software.

"dcubadcmd2"
Disk thinks it got a bad command (sense bits).  Hardware/software.

"dcubadmem"
Disk finds a bad page address when building page map for physical i/o.
Software error.

"dcuidle"
Disk controller interrupted, saying it was idle when it should have been busy.
Hardware error.

"dcunoburst"
Disk would not accept DMA burst size initialization.
Definite hardware error.

"dcunostorage"
Disk driver could not allocate some page aligned memory. Never happens.

"dcunotidle"
Disk controller not idle when it should be.  Hardware error.

"dcunounits"
Disk controller cannot find any drives.  Definite hardware error.

"dcunullunit"
Disk interrupted, said it was not idle, but it should have been.
Hardware.

"dcutimeout"
Disk timed out during initialization sequence.  Definite hardware error.

"devtab"
Impossible. The block device's data structure address is 0. Possible corrupt
table, or silly software error.

"fillnotfile"
Pagein was called for a "fill from file" page which was not for a file.

"freebadowner"
Freepage found that the owning page for a data page was not a page table page.

"freebadowner2"
Freepage found that the owning page for a page table was not a page table page.

"freebadpagetype"
Freepage tried to free an invalid type of page.

"freebadpte1"
Clearptetable found an invalid type of pte.

"freepageisnt"
Allocpage found a free page which was not really free.

"freeswaptwice"
Swapfree tried to free a page of the swapping space which was alread free.

"freeusedpage"
Freepage tried to free a page which was not freeable.

"iinit"
Can't read the initial root super block.

"ioccom canq"
On transition from cbreak mode to other modes, the canonical char queue has
not been flushed. Never happens.

"IO err in swap"
Pageio got a disk error tring to read or write a page.

"nestedswap"
Pageio found that its buffer to use for paging was already in use.

"nofreepages"
Allocpage could not create a free memory page, even by trying to swap.

"no imt"
Accessing a mounted filesystem the system finds it has lost the mount table
entry. Impossible, but has been seen.

"nopagepte"
Freepage could not find the owning page table for a page.

"no procs"
System ran out of process slots even after it checked first.
This has never been seen.

"NOROOTDIR"
When system boots, it can't find a root inode -- Did you make a filesystem?

"nosharepte"
Xunshare could not find all the users of a text page.

"noswappage"
Swapoutpages could not find any memory page which could be swapped.

"noswapspace"
Swapalloc could not allocate a page of the swap area.

"pagein err for u."
Couldn't page in a page of u.  Hardware/software.

"physiolock"
When system attempted raw i/o it could not lock in a user address space page.
Software error.

"remque"
Remque tried to remove a process from the run queue which wasn't on it.
Software error.

"setbadpte"
Setmap tried to set an invalid type of pte.

"setmapnopagein"
Setmap (which sets new pte entryes) could not page in a page table.

"setrq"
Setrq was asked to put a nonrunnable or unloaded process on the run queue.
Software error.

"setrun"
Setrun called with a process already runnable or which can't possibly
be runnable.  Software error.

"sleep"
Sleep was called with a channel of zero or for a process which can't
be eligible for sleeping.  Software error.

"swaplockpage"
Swappage was asked to swap a page which was locked.  Software error.

"swtch"
Swtch tried to context switch to a nonrunnable or unloaded process.
Software error.

"swtchu not locked"
u. area was being mapped to pages which were not locked.
Software error.

"swtchu swapped out"
u. area was being mapped to pages not in memory.  Software error.

"stray interrupt"
Interrupt from nowhere discernable --- currently not possible.

"supervisorabort"
An illegal page fault in supervisor mode occurred.  Hardware/software.

"swapout"
Swapout tried to swap out the current process or a process not in memory.
Software error.

"Timeout"
Out of timeout structures (They are not being used now, so you shouldn't see this)

"trap"
Random "impossible" trap, usually from kernel mode. Trap type and other goodies
are printed out.

"trylockfile"
Xpagein was given invalid arguments.

"tryunlockfile"
Xunlock was given invalid arguments.

"ttyrub"
Tryed to crt delete a character of unkown (e.g. out of subrange) type.
Never happens.

"unknownabort"
Aborttrap found unknown mmu msr status for an abort.

"unlock err for u."
Couldn't find the physical address for a u. page.

"wakeup"
Wakeup called with a process on the run queue or not sleeping or stopped.
Software error.

"xpagein"
Xpagein couldn't page in a page of text.  Hardware/software.

